Marvelmind Updates
==================

Updating Marvelmind modem.
--------------------------

First, open the marvelmind dashboard with the marvelmind modem plugged
in to a Windows PC. You should be presented with a screen that looks
likes this:

.. figure:: images/marvelmindupdate1.png
   :alt: 

As you notice, circled at the bottom left of the dashboard, in red, is
the **version number** of the modem. If the modem is not on the latest
update, according to `Marvelmind.com <https://www.marvelmind.com>`__,
and you wish to be on the latest update, click on the firmware tab at
the top left of the dashboard, as circled in this figure:

.. figure:: images/marvelmindupdate2.png
   :alt: 

Navigate to the SW folder that you unzipped upon installation, and click
on the folder labeled after your **modem version**, either 4.5 or 4.9.
Then find the modem **firmware zip file**, unzip it, and double click
the **hex file** inside and you should be returned to the dashboard, as
shown:

.. figure:: images/marvelmindupdate3.png
   :alt: 

Click **next**, and the update should start. Once the update has
concluded, close the dashboard.

Updating Marvelmind beacons.
----------------------------

First, open the marvelmind dashboard with the marvelmind beacon plugged
in to a Windows PC. You should be presented with a screen that looks
likes this:

.. figure:: images/marvelmindupdate4.png
   :alt: 

As you notice, circled at the bottom left of the dashboard, in red, is
the **version number** of the beacon. If the beacon is not on the latest
update, according to `Marvelmind.com <https://www.marvelmind.com>`__,
and you wish to be on the latest update, click on the firmware tab at
the top left of the dashboard, as circled in this figure:

.. figure:: images/marvelmindupdate5.png
   :alt: 

Navigate to the SW folder that you unzipped upon installation, and click
on the folder labeled after your **modem version**, either 4.5 or 4.9.
Then find the beacon **firmware zip file**, unzip it, and double click
the **hex file** inside and you should be returned to the dashboard, as
shown:

.. figure:: images/marvelmindupdate6.png
   :alt: 

Click **next**, and the update should start. Once the update has
concluded, close the dashboard.
